# Contribute to a repository

1. First check where your repo status `git status`.
   1. Check what branch you are on. If you are not on the branch you want to be (usually `main` or `master`, however you can base your new branch on any existing branch) checkout the correct branch (`git checkout branch_name`).
   2. Check if or what files are changed.
2. Pull the latest remote changes using `git pull`
3. Create you own branch (which is based on your current branch) by doing `git checkout -b branch_name`. 
   1. Follow your company/department/team naming conventions (for instance `feature/feature_name`). The parameter `-b` means create a new branch. 
   2. You can checkout existing branches (without using the parameter `-b`). `git branch -a` shows available branchs and `-a` means all (not only branchs you have worked on previously). When there are many branches the result may be shown in a reader. You can use arrows up and down to scroll and letter `q` to quit the reader. To learn about branches in the remote repository do `git pull` or `git fetch` (sometimes you may know about a branch that exists in the remote repository by using web browser but your local git repository needs to learn about that branch as well before it can check it out).
4. Do the code changes in the repository. When there is a change you would like to store staging is the next step. First perform `git status` to confirm you are on correct branch and to list all the filechanges that have happened. Then the staging is done by `git add filename` command. Staging can be done on directory level as well. So for instance `git add .` stages all the changes in the current directory and bellow. Repeat step 4. until happy with the changes.
5. When happy about the changes that have been staged (do `git status` to double check what has been staged so far) the next step is to commit the changes. Use `git commit -m "my commit message"`. Do not skip the `-m "text"` parameter as the commit message is mandatory. If the message is not provided directly git takes you to vim text editor to create it interactively. Using vim without knowing how can be tricky so avoid unless you know what you do.
6. Once the changes are commited they can be pushed to the remote repository (for instance GitHub, Azure DevOps, ...). `git push` does the trick. The first time a new branch is pushed to remote repository the push needs to be specific about creating the new branch remotely. Doing simple `git push` would not execute but it gives you the exact command to execute to create the branch remotely. The easiest thing to do here is to copy and paste the command git recommends.
7. You can double check that the changes are present in the remote repository using the web interface of the remote repository. When happy you can raise a Pull Request to merge your feature branch to main/master branch of the repository.